Now we are going to add a third link to my
robot.
So now, we have a 3-degree of freedom robot
with 3 revolute or 3 rotational joints.
This robot has a much larger working volume.
It can reach any point within this very large
circle here, but because it has got 3 degrees
of freedom it means it cannot only reach any
particular position within its work space.
It can also achieve any orientation at that
particular position.
If for example the robot's end effector position
is here, then the robot with 3 degrees of
freedom is able to achieve any arbitrate orientation
of this last link of the robot.
We could see I can move it through quite a
large range of angles of that link and it
is possible because it has 1 extra degree
of freedom.
Let us determine the pose of the end effector
of our 3-link robot.
The first thing we are going to do is to annotate
the robot and introduce the lengths of the
various links and then we are going to introduce
the various joint angles.
Q1 and Q2 in this diagram are both positive
and Q3 here is a negative value.
You note that the direction of rotation is
the opposite of that for Q1 and Q2.
When we did this for the 1 and 2 joint robots,
I showed an animation of the coordinate frame
moving from the reference coordinate frame
along the links and ending up at the end effector.
I am not going to do that animation this time.
I think you got the general idea and what
we are going to do is just write down the
transform expression by inspection.
The 1st thing we are going to do is to rotate
it at Q1, translate in the X-direction by
A1, rotate by the angle Q2, translate along
the 2nd link in its X-direction by the amount
of A2 and then rotate by the angle Q3 and
then translate in the X-direction by an amount
A3.
Once again, I can expand out what these matrices
and multiply them together to come up with
a homogenous transformation which represents
the pose of the end effector of this 3-joint
robot.
To do this by hand for the 3-link robot is
a little bit tedious.
I might make an error.
So we are going to go straight to MATLAB and
do it there.
Now, we are going to use the MATLAB to compute
the pose of the end effector of this 3-link
planar robot.
We are going to do it just in symbolic form
this time.
I create some symbols to represent the 3 links
lengths: A1, A2 and A3 and they represent
the 3 joint angles: Q1, Q2 and Q3.
Once again, we used the trchain2 to function
and the string now I pass in describes the
way the coordinate frame moves from the base
of the robot to the tip.
So I am going to do a rotation by the angle
Q1, translation by the distance A1, a rotation
by angle Q2, translation in the X-direction
by the distance A2, another rotation this
one by the angle Q3 and another translation
by the distance A3 that is moving along the
3rd link of the robot.
Now, I am going to pass the end effector of
the joint angles Q1, Q2 and Q3 and here, we
have a symbolic expression which represents
the pose of the end effector of this 3-link
robot.
You see this is now quite a complex expression
as we need to scroll sideways to see the end
of it.
The x component for example is given by the
1st row and the 3rd column of the result that
I just computed and that is the expression
for the X-coordinate of the end effector of
the 3-link robot.
I can also import a model of a planar 3-link
robot and that is the tool box function and
the planar tree creates a serial link object
in our workspace.
The variable is called P3 and there is some
methods that I can apply to this object and
the teach method that we have looked at previously.
I can do it on this 3-link robot and here
it is.
I can increase joint angle number 1.
I can decrease joint angle number 2.
I can increase joint angle number 3 and we
can see it moving and we can see the position
of the end effector changing as I adjust these
sliders.